CHAP. XIII. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus by George Long, M.A.
Marcus Antoninus was born at Rome AD 121 on the 26th of April.
His father Aeneas Verus died while he was praetor. His mother was Domitia Colvilla,
also named Lucilla. The emperor Titus Antoninus Pius married Aenea Galeria Faustina,
the sister of Aeneas Verus, and was consequently the uncle of Marcus Antoninus.
When Hadrian adopted Antoninus Pius and declared him his successor in the empire,
Antoninus Pius adopted both Lucius Sionius Commodus, the son of Aelius Caesar, and Marcus
Antoninus, whose original name was Marcus Aeneas Verus. Antoninus then took the name of Marcus
Aelius Aurelius Verus, to which was added the title of Caesar in AD 139. The name Aelius belonged
to Hadrian's family, and Aurelius was the name of Antoninus Pius. When Marcus Antoninus became
Augustus, he dropped the name of Verus and took the name of Antoninus. Accordingly,
he is generally named Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, or simply Marcus Antoninus.
The youth was most carefully brought up. He thanks the gods that he had good grandfathers,
good parents, a good sister, good teachers, good associates, good kinsmen and friends,
nearly everything good. He had the happy fortune to witness the example of his uncle
and adoptive father Antoninus Pius, and he has recorded in his work the virtues of this excellent
man and prudent ruler. Like many young Romans, he tried his hand at poetry and studied rhetoric.
Herodes Atticus and Marcus Cornelius Fronto were his teachers in eloquence.
There are extant letters between Fronto and Marcus, which show the great affection of the
pupil for the master, and the master's great hopes of his industrious pupil.
Marcus Corneliae Fontonis Reliquiae, Berlin 1816. There are a few letters between Fronto and
Antoninus Pius. Marcus Antoninus mentions Fronto among those to whom he was indebted for his
education. When he was 11 years old, he assumed the dress of philosophers, something plain and
coarse, became a hard student, and lived a most laborious, abstemious life, even so far as to
injure his health. Finally, he abandoned poetry and rhetoric for philosophy, and he attached
himself to the sect the Stoics. But he did not neglect the study of law, which was a useful
preparation for the high place which he was designed to fill. His teacher was Lucius Velassianus
Mycenaeus, a distinguished jurist. We must suppose that he learned the Roman discipline of arms,
which was a necessary part of the education of a man who afterwards led his troops to battle
against a warlike race. Antoninus has recorded in his first book the names of his teachers and the
obligations which he owed to each of them. The way in which he speaks of what he learned from them
might seem to savor a vanity or self-praise if we look carelessly at the way in which he has
expressed himself. But if anyone draws this conclusion, he will be mistaken. Antoninus
means to commemorate the merits of his several teachers, what they taught, and what a pupil
might learn from them. Besides, this book, like the eleven other books, was for his own use,
and if we may trust the note at the end of the first book, it was written during one of Marcus
Antoninus's campaigns against the Quadi, at a time when the commemoration of the virtues of
his illustrious teachers might remind him of their lessons and the practical uses which he
might derive from them. Among his teachers of philosophy was Sextus of Chaeronea, a grandson
of Plutarch. What he learned from this excellent man is told by himself. His favorite teacher was
Quintus Junius Rusticus, a philosopher and also a man of practical good sense in public affairs.
Rusticus was the advisor of Antoninus after he became emperor. Young men who are destined
for high places are not often fortunate in those who are about them, their companions and teachers.
I do not know any example of a young prince having had an education which can be compared
with that of Marcus Antoninus. Such a body of teachers, distinguished by their requirements
and their character, will hardly be collected again, and as to the pupil, we have not had one
like him since. Hadrian died in July AD 138 and was succeeded by Antoninus Pius. Marcus Antoninus
married Faustina, his cousin, the daughter of Pius, probably about AD 146, for he had a daughter
born in 147. He received from his adoptive father the title of Caesar and was associated with him
in the administration of the state. The father and the adopted son lived together in perfect
friendship and confidence. Antoninus was a dutiful son and the emperor Pius loved and esteemed him.
Antoninus Pius died in March AD 161. The senate, it is said, urged Marcus Antoninus to take the
sole administration of the empire, but he associated with himself the other adopted son of Pius,
Lucius Sianius Commodus, who is generally called Lucius Verus. Thus Rome, for the first time,
had two emperors. Verus was an indolent man of pleasure and unworthy of his station. Antoninus,
however, bore with him and it is said that Verus had enough sense to pay his colleague the respect
due to his character. A virtuous emperor and a loose partner lived together in peace and their
alliance was strengthened by Antoninus giving to Verus for wife his daughter Lucilla. The reign of
Antoninus was first troubled by a Parthian war in which Verus was sent to command, but he did
nothing and the success that was obtained by the Romans in Armenia and on the Euphrates and Tigris
was due to his generals. This Parthian war ended in AD 165. Aurelius and Verus had a triumph,
AD 166, for the victories in the east. A pestilence followed which carried off great
numbers in Rome and Italy and spread to the west of Europe. The north of Italy was also threatened
by the rude people beyond the Alps from the borders of Gallia to the eastern side of the
Adriatic. These barbarians attempted a break into Italy as the Germanic nations had attempted near
300 years before and the rest of the life of Antoninus, with some intervals, was employed
in driving back the invaders. In 169, Verus suddenly died and Antoninus administered the
state alone. During the German wars, Antoninus resided for three years on the Danube at Carnuntum.
The Marco Mani were driven out of Pannonia and almost destroyed in their retreat across the
Danube and in AD 174 the emperor gained a great victory over the Quadi. In AD 175,
Avidius Cassius, a brave and skillful Roman commander who was at the head of the troops in Asia,
revolted and declared himself Augustus, but Cassius was assassinated by some of his officers
and so the rebellion came to an end. Antoninus showed his humanity by his treatment of the
family and the partisans of Cassius and his letter to the senate in which he recommends mercy is
extant. Antoninus set out for the east on hearing of Cassius's revolt. Though he appears to have
returned to Rome in AD 174, he went back to prosecute the war against the Germans and it
probable that he marched direct to the east from the German war. His wife Faustina who accompanied
him into Asia died suddenly at the foot of the Taurus to the great grief of her husband.
Cappatilinus who has written the life of Antoninus and also Dion Cassius accused the empress of
scandalous infidelity to her husband and of abominable lewdness, but Cappatilinus says
Antoninus either knew it not or pretended not to know it. Nothing is so common as such malicious
reports in all ages and the history of imperial Rome is full of them. Antoninus loved his wife
and he says that she was obedient, affectionate, and simple. The same scandal had been spread about
Faustina's mother, the wife of Antoninus Pius, and yet he too was perfectly satisfied with his wife.
Antoninus Pius says after her death in a letter to Fronto that he would rather have lived in exile
with his wife than in his palace at Rome without her. There are not many men who would give their
wives a better character than these two emperors. Cappatilinus wrote in the time of Diocletian.
He may have intended to tell the truth, but he is a poor feeble biographer. Dion Cassius,
the most malignant of historians, always reports and perhaps he believed any scandal against anybody.
Antoninus continued his journey to Syria and Egypt and on his return to Italy through Athens
he was initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries. It was the practice of the emperor to conform to
the established rites of the age and to perform religious ceremonies with due solemnity.
We cannot conclude from this that he was a superstitious man, though we might perhaps
do so if his book did not show that he was not. But this is only one among many instances that
a ruler's public acts do not always prove his real opinions. A prudent governor will not roughly
oppose even the superstitions of his people, and though he may wish that they were wiser,
he will know that he cannot make them so by offending their prejudices.
Antoninus and his son Commodus entered Rome in triumph, perhaps for some German victories,
on the 23rd of December AD 176. In the following year Commodus was associated with his father in
the empire and took the name of Augustus. This year AD 177 is memorable in ecclesiastical history.
Attalus and others were put to death at Lyon for their adherence to the Christian religion.
The evidence of this persecution is a letter preserved by Eusebius. The letter is from the
Christians of Vienna and Lugdunum in Gallia, Vienna and Lyon, to their Christian brethren
in Asia and Phrygia, and it is preserved perhaps nearly entire. It contains a very
particular description of the tortures inflicted on the Christians in Gallia, and it states that
while the persecution was going on, Attalus, a Christian and a Roman citizen, was loudly
demanded by the populace and brought into the amphitheater, but the governor ordered him to be
reserved with the rest who were in prison, until he had received instructions from the emperor.
Many had been tortured before the governor thought of applying to Antoninus.
The imperial rescript says the letter was that the Christians should be punished,
but if they would deny their faith they must be released. On this the work began again. The
amphitheater. Some modern writers in ecclesiastical history, when they use this letter,
say nothing of the wonderful stories of the martyr's sufferings.
Sanctus, as the letter says, was burnt with plates of hot iron, till his body was one sore and he had
lost all human form, but on being put to the rack he recovered his former appearance under the
torture, which was thus a cure instead of a punishment. He was afterwards torn by beasts
and placed on an iron chair and roasted. He died at last.
The letter is one piece of evidence. The writer, whoever he was that wrote in the name of the
Gallic Christians, is our evidence both for the ordinary and the extraordinary circumstances of
the story, and we cannot accept his evidence for one part and reject the other. We often receive
small evidence as a proof of a thing which we believe to be within the limits of probability
or possibility, and we reject exactly the same evidence when the thing to which it refers appears
very improbable or impossible. But this is a false method of inquiry, though it is followed by some
modern writers, who select what they like from a story and reject the rest of the evidence,
or if they do not reject it they dishonestly suppress it. A man can only act consistently
by accepting all this letter or rejecting it all, and we cannot blame him for either.
But he who rejects it may still admit that such a letter may be founded on real facts,
and he would make this admission as the most probable way of accounting for the existence
of the letter. But if, as he would suppose, the writer has stated some things falsely,
he cannot tell what part of his story is worthy of credit.
The war on the northern frontier appears to have been uninterrupted during the visit of Antoninus
to the east, and on his return the emperor again left Rome to oppose the barbarians.
The Germanic people were defeated in a great battle AD 179. During this campaign the emperor
was seized with some contagious malady, of which he died in the camp at Sirmium, Mitrovitz, on the
Sava in Lower Pannonia, but at Vindabena, Vienna, according to other authorities, on the 17th March
AD 180, in the 59th year of his age. His son Commodus was with him. The body or the ashes,
probably of the emperor, were carried to Rome, and he received the honor of deification.
Those who could afford it had his statue or bust, and when Cuppatilinus wrote,
many people still had statues of Antoninus among the Deipinates, or household deities.
He was in a manner made a saint. Commodus erected to the memory of his father the
Antonine Column, which is now in the Piazza Colonna at Rome. The bas reliefs, which are
placed in a spiral line around the shaft, commemorate the victories of Antoninus over
the Marcomanni and the Quatti, and the miraculous shower of rain which refreshed the Roman soldiers
and discomfited their enemies. The statue of Antoninus was placed on the capital of the Column,
but it was removed at some time unknown, and a bronze statue of Saint Paul was put in the
place of Pope Sixtus V. The historical evidence for the times of Antoninus is very defective,
and some of that which remains is not credible. The most curious is the story about the miracle
which happened in AD 174 during the war with the Quatti. The Roman army was in danger of perishing
by thirst, but a sudden storm drenched them with rain, while it discharged fire and hail on their
enemies, and the Romans gained a great victory. All the authorities which speak of the battle
speak also of the miracle. The Gentile writers assigned it to their gods, and the Christians
to the intercession of the Christian legion and the emperor's army. To confirm the Christian
statement, it is added that the emperor gave the title of thundering to this legion, but Dossier
and others who maintain the Christian report of the miracle admit that this title of thundering
or lightning was not given to this legion because the Quatti were struck with lightning,
but because there was a figure of lightning on their shields, and that this title of the
legion existed in the time of Augustus. Scaliger also had observed that the legion was called
thundering before the reign of Antoninus. We can learn this from Dion Cassius, who enumerates all
the legions of Augustus's time. The name thundering or lightning also occurs on an inscription of the
Trajan, which was found at Trieste. Eusebius, when he relates the miracle, quotes Apollinarius,
bishop of Hierapolis, as authority for this name being given to the legion Melitini by the emperor
in consequence of the success which he had obtained through their prayers, from which we may estimate
the value of Apollinarius's testimony. Eusebius does not say in what book of Apollinarius the
statement occurs. Dion says that the thundering legion was stationed in Cappadocia in the time
of Augustus. Velasius also observes that in the notitia of the Imperium Romanum,
there is mentioned under the commander of Armenia the prefectura of the 12th legion
named thundering Melitini, and this position in Armenia will agree with what Dion says of
its position in Cappadocia. Accordingly, Velasius concludes that Melitini was not the name of the
legion, but of the town in which it was stationed. Melitini was also the name of the district in which
this town was situated. The legions did not, he says, take their name from the place where they
were on duty, but from the country in which they were raised, and therefore what Eusebius says about
the Melitini does not seem probable to him. Yet Velasius, on the authority of Apollinarius and
Tertullian, believed that the miracle was worked through the prayers of the Christian soldiers and
the emperor's army. Rufinus does not give the name of Melitini to this legion, says Velasius,
and probably he purposely omitted it, because he knew that Melitini was the name of a town in
Armenia Minor, where the legion was stationed in his time. The emperor, it is said, made a report
of his victory to the senate, which we may believe, for such was the practice. But we do not know what
he said in his letter, for it is not extant. Dossier assumes that the emperor's letter was
purposely destroyed by the senate, or the enemies of Christianity, that so honorable a testimony to
Christians and their religion might not be perpetuated. The critic has, however, not seen
that he contradicts when he tells us purported the letter, for he says that it was destroyed,
and even Eusebius could not find it. But there does exist a letter in Greek addressed by Antoninus
to the Roman people and the sacred senate after this memorable victory. It is sometimes printed
after Justin's first apology, but is totally unconnected with the apologies. This letter is
one of the most stupid forgeries of the many which exist, and it cannot be possibly founded
even on the genuine report of Antoninus to the senate. If it were genuine, it would free the
emperor from the charge of persecuting men because they were Christians. For he says in this false
letter that if a man accused another only of being a Christian, and the accused confess and there is
nothing else against him, he must be set free. With this monstrous addition, made by a man
inconceivably ignorant, that the informer must be burnt alive. During the time of Antoninus Pius
and Marcus Antoninus, there appeared the first apology of Justinus, and under Marcus Antoninus
the oration of Tatian against the Greeks, which was a fierce attack on the established religions.
The address of Athenagoras to Marcus Antoninus on behalf of the Christians and the apology of
Plato, Bishop of Sardis, also addressed to the emperor and that of Apollinarius.
The first apology of Justinus is addressed to Titus Antoninus Pius and his two adopted sons,
Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Verus, but we do not know whether they read it.
Footnote, Aureus says that Justinus the philosopher presented to Antoninus Pius his
work in defense of the Christian religion, and made him merciful to the Christians.
End footnote.
The second apology of Justinus is entitled To the Roman Senate,
but this superscription is from some copyist. In the first chapter Justinus addresses the Romans.
In the second chapter he speaks of an affair that had recently happened in the time of Marcus
Antoninus and Lucius Verus as it seems, and he also directly addresses the emperor, saying of
emperor, and thou didst grant the petition.
In other passages the writer addresses the two emperors, from which we must conclude that the
apology was directed to them. Eusebius states that the second apology was addressed to the
successor of Antoninus Pius, and he names him Antoninus Verus, meaning Marcus Antoninus.
In one passage of the second apology, Justinus, or the writer whoever he may be, says that even
men who followed the Stoic doctrines when they ordered their lives according to ethical reason
were hated and murdered, such as Heraclitus, Musonius in his own times, and others. For all
those who in any way labored to live according to reason and avoided wickedness were always hated,
and this was the effect of the work of demons.
Justinus himself is said to have been put to death at Rome because he refused to sacrifice to the
states, nor in the time of Antoninus Pius, if the second apology was written in the time of Marcus
Antoninus, and there was evidence that this event took place under Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Verus,
when Rusticus was prefect of the city.
The persecution in which Polycarp suffered at Smyrna belongs to the time of Marcus Antoninus.
The evidence for it is the letter of the church of Smyrna to the churches of Philomelium and the
But the critics do not agree about the time of Polycarp's death,
differing in the two extremes to the amount of 12 years.
The circumstances of Polycarp's martyrdom were accompanied by miracles, one of which Eusebius
has omitted, but it appears in the oldest Latin version of the letter, which Usher published,
and it is supposed that this version was made not long after the time of Eusebius.
The notice at the end of the letter states that it was transcribed by Caius,
from the copy of Irenaeus, the disciple of Polycarp, then transcribed by Socrates at Corinth,
after which I, Pioneus, again wrote it out from the copy above mentioned,
having searched it out by the revelation of Polycarp, who directed it to me, etc.
The story of Polycarp's martyrdom is embellished with miraculous circumstances
which some modern writers on ecclesiastical history take the liberty of omitting.
Footnote.
Conyers Middleton, An Inquiry into the Miraculous Powers, etc. page 126.
Middleton says that Eusebius omitted to mention the dove, which flew out of Polycarp's body,
and Dodwell and Archbishop Wake have done the same.
Wake says, I am so little a friend to such miracles that I thought it better with Eusebius
to omit that circumstance than to mention it from Bishop Usher's manuscript.
Which manuscript, however, says Middleton, he afterwards declares to be so well attested
that we need not any further assurance of the truth of it.
End footnote.
In order to form a proper notion of the condition of the Christians under Marcus Antoninus,
we must go back to Trajan's time.
When the younger Pliny was governor of Bithynia, the Christians were numerous in those parts,
and the worshippers of the old religion were falling off.
The temples were deserted, the festivals neglected,
and there were no purchasers of victims for sacrifice.
Those who were interested in the maintenance of the old religion
thus found that their prophets were in danger.
Christians of both sexes and of all ages were brought before the governor,
who did not know what to do with them.
He could come to know their conclusion in this,
that those who confess to be Christians and persevered in their religion ought to be punished,
if for nothing else for their invincible obstinacy.
He found no crimes proved against the Christians,
and he could only characterize their religion as a depraved and extravagant superstition,
which might be stopped if the people are allowed the opportunity of recanting.
Pliny wrote this in a letter to Trajan.
Footnote.
The Martyrium Ignatii, first published in Latin by Archbishop Usher,
is the chief evidence for the circumstances of Ignatius's death.
End footnote.
In the time of Hadrian, it was no longer possible for the Roman government
to overlook the great increase of the Christians and the hostility of the common sort to them.
If the governors in the provinces were willing to let them alone,
they could not resist the fanaticism of the heathen community,
who looked on the Christians as atheists.
The Jews, too, who were settled all over the Roman Empire,
were as hostile to the Christians as the Gentiles were.
Footnote.
We have the evidence of Justinus to this effect.
The Christians are attacked by the Jews as if they were men of a different race,
and are persecuted by the Greeks,
and those who hate them cannot give the reason of their enmity.
End footnote.
With the time of Hadrian began the Christian apologies,
which show plainly what the popular feeling towards the Christians then was.
A re-script of Hadrian to Manutius Fundanus, the proconsul of Asia,
which stands at the end of Justin's first apology,
instructs the governor that innocent people must not be troubled,
and false accusers must not be allowed to extort money from them.
The charges against the Christians must be made in due form,
and no attention must be paid to popular clamors.
When Christians were regularly prosecuted and convicted of illegal acts,
they must be punished according to their deserts,
and false accusers also must be punished.
Footnote.
And in Eusebius, Erosius says that Hadrian sent this re-script to Manutius Fundanus,
proconsul of Asia,
after being instructed in books written on the Christian religion by Quadratus,
a disciple of the apostles,
and Aristides, an Athenian, an honest and wise man,
and Serenus Grineus.
In the Greek text of Hadrian's re-script,
there is mentioned Serenius Grineanus, the predecessor of Manutius Fundanus,
in the government of Asia.
This re-script of Hadrian has clearly been added to the apology by some editor.
End footnote.
Antonius Pius is said to have published re-scripts to the same effect.
The terms of Hadrian's re-script seem very favorable to the Christians,
but if we understand it in this sense,
that they were only to be punished like other people for illegal acts,
it would have no meaning,
for that could have been done without asking the emperor's advice.
The real purpose of the re-script is that Christians must be punished
if they persisted in their belief,
and would not prove their renunciation of it by acknowledging the heathen religion.
This was Trajan's rule,
and we have no reason for supposing that Hadrian
granted more to the Christians than Trajan did.
There is also printed at the end of Justin's first apology,
a re-script of Antoninus Pius to the commune of Asia,
and it is also in Eusebius.
The date of the re-script is the third consulship of Antoninus Pius.
The re-script declares that the Christians, for they are meant,
though the name Christians does not occur in the re-script,
were not to be disturbed unless they were attempting something against the Roman rule,
and no man was to be punished simply for being a Christian.
But this re-script is spurious.
Any man moderately acquainted with Roman history
will see by the style and tenor that it is a clumsy forgery.
In the time of Marcus Antoninus,
the opposition between the old and the new belief was still stronger,
and the adherents of the heathen religion urged those in authority
to a more regular resistance to the invasions of the Christian faith.
Melito, in his apology to Marcus Antoninus,
represents the Christians of Asia as persecuted under new imperial orders.
Shameless informers, he says, men who were greedy after the property of others,
used these orders as a means of robbing those who were doing no harm.
He doubts if a just emperor could have ordered anything so unjust,
and if the last order was really not from the emperor,
the Christians entreat him not to give them up to their enemies.
We conclude from this that there were at least imperial re-scripts
or constitutions of Marcus Antoninus which were made the foundations of these persecutions.
The fact of being a Christian was now a crime and punished
unless the accused denied their religion.
Then come the persecutions at Smyrna, which some modern critics place in AD 167,
ten years before the persecution of Lyon.
The governors of the provinces under Marcus Antoninus might have found enough
even in Trajan's re-script to warrant them in punishing Christians,
and the fanaticism of the people would drive them to persecution even if they were unwilling.
But besides the fact of the Christians rejecting all the heathen ceremonies,
we must not forget that they plainly maintained that all the heathen religions were false.
The Christians thus declared war against the heathen rights,
and it is hardly necessary to observe that this was a declaration of hostility against
the Roman government, which tolerated all the various forms of superstition that existed in
the empire and could not consistently tolerate another religion, which declared that all the
rest were false, and all the splendid ceremonies of the empire only a worship of devils.
If we had a true ecclesiastical history, we should know how the Roman empires attempted to
the new religion, how they enforced their principle of finally punishing Christians,
simply as Christians, which Justin in his apology affirms that they did,
and I have no doubt that he tells the truth. How far popular clamor and riots went in this matter,
and how far many fanatical and ignorant Christians, for there were many such,
contributed to excite the fanaticism on the other side and to
embedder the quarrel between the Roman government and the new religion.
Our extant ecclesiastical histories are manifestly falsified, and what truth they contain is grossly
exaggerated, but the fact is certain that in the time of Marcus Antoninus the heathen populations
were an open hostility to the Christians, and that under Antoninus' rule men were put to death
because they were Christians. Eusebius in the preface to his fifth book remarks that in the
seventeenth year of Antoninus' reign in some parts of the world the persecution of the Christians
became more violent and that it proceeded from the populace in the cities, and he adds in his
usual style of exaggeration that we may infer from what took place in a single nation that myriads
of martyrs were made in the habitable earth. The nation which he alludes to is Gallia,
and he then proceeds to give the letter to the churches of Vienna and Lugdunum.
It is probable that he has assigned the true cause of the persecutions, the fanaticism of
with these disturbances. How far Marcus was cognizant of these cruel proceedings we do not
know, for the historical records of his reign are very defective. He did not make the rule
against the Christians, for Trajan did that, and if we admit that he would have been willing to let
the Christians alone we cannot affirm that he was in his power, for it would be a great mistake to
suppose that Antoninus had the unlimited authority which some modern sovereigns have had. His power
was limited by certain constitutional forms, by the senate, and by the precedence of his predecessors.
We cannot admit that such a man was an active persecutor, for there is no evidence that he
was, though it is certain that he had no good opinion of the Christians, as appears from his
own words. Footnote. Except that of Erosius, who says that during the Parthian War there were
grievous persecutions of the Christians in Asia and Gallia under the orders of Marcus,
prakepto aeius, and, quote, many were crowned with the martyrdom of saints, unquote. End footnote.
But he knew nothing of them except their hostility to the Roman religion, and he probably thought
that they were dangerous to the state, notwithstanding the professions false or true of some of the
apologists. So much I have said, because it would be unfair not to state all that can be urged
against a man whom his contemporaries in subsequent ages venerated as a model of virtue
and benevolence. If I admitted the genuineness of some documents, he would be altogether clear
from the charge of even allowing any persecutions. But as I seek the truth and am sure that they are
false, I leave him to bear whatever blame is his due. Footnote. Dr. F.C. Bower, in his work entitled,
etc., has examined this question with great good sense and fairness,
and I believe he has stated the truth as near as our authorities enable us to reach it.
End footnote. I add that it is quite certain that Antoninus did not derive any of his ethical
principles from a religion of which he knew nothing. Footnote. In the digest there is the
In the first book he speaks of himself, his family, and his teachers, and in other books
himself. Suedas notices the work of Antoninus in 12 books, which he names the conduct of his own
life, and he cites the book under several words in his dictionary, giving the emperor's name,
but not the title of the work. There are also passages cited by Suedas from Antoninus
without mention of the emperor's name. The true title of the work is unknown.
Zylander, who published the first edition of this book with a Latin version, used a manuscript
which contained the 12 books, but it is not known where the manuscript is now.
The only other complete manuscript which is known to exist is in the Vatican Library, but it has
no titles and no inscriptions of the several books. The 11th only has the inscription
marked with an asterisk. The other Vatican manuscripts in the 3 Florentine contain only
excerpts from the emperor's book. All the titles of the excerpts nearly agree with that which
Zylander prefixed to his edition. This title has been used by all subsequent editors. We cannot
tell whether Antoninus divided his work into books or somebody else did it. If the inscriptions at
the end of the first and second books are genuine, he may have made the division himself.
It is plain that the emperor wrote down his thoughts or reflections as the occasions arose,
and since they were intended for his own use, it is no improbable conjecture that he left a
manuscript, for it is not likely that so diligent a man would use the labor of a
transcriber for such a purpose and expose his most secret thoughts to any other eye.
He may have also intended the book for his son Eusebius Commodus, who however had no taste for
his father's philosophy. Some careful hand preserved the precious volume, and a work by
Antoninus is mentioned by other late writers besides Suidas. Many critics have labored on
Antoninus. The most complete edition is that by Thomas Gattacher, 1652, quarto. The second edition
of Gattacher was superintended by George Stanep, 1697, quarto. There is also an edition of 1704.
Gattacher made and suggested many good corrections, and he also made a new Latin version,
which is not a very good specimen of Latin, but it generally expresses the sense of the original,
and often better than some of the more recent translations. He added in the margin opposite
to each paragraph references to the other parallel passages, and he wrote a commentary,
one of the most complete that has been written on any ancient author. This commentary contains
the editor's exposition of the more difficult passages, and quotations from all the Greek and
Roman writers for the illustration of the text. It is a wonderful monument of learning and labor,
and certainly no Englishman has yet done anything like it.
At the end of his preface, the editor says that he wrote it at Rotherhiss, near London in a severe
winter, when he was in the 78th year of his age, 1651, a time when Milton, Seldon, and other great
men of the Commonwealth time were living, and the great French scholar Somaz, Salmatius, with whom
Gattacher corresponded and received help from him for his edition of Antoninus. The Greek text has
also been edited by J.M. Schultz, Leipzig 1802, 8 volumes, and by the learned Greek Athamantinous
Corais, Paris 1816, 8 volumes. The text of Schultz was republished by Tauchnitz, 1821.
There are English, German, French, Italian, and Spanish translations of Marcus Antoninus,
and there may be others. I have not seen all the English translations. There is one by Jeremy
Collier, 1702, 8 volumes, a most coarse and vulgar copy of the original. The latest French
translation by Alexis Pierron, in the collection of Charpentier, is better than Dossier's,
which has been honored with an Italian version, Oudinay, 1772. There is an Italian version, 1675,
which I have not seen. It is by a cardinal. Quote, A man illustrious in the church, the cardinal
Francis Barberini the Elder, nephew of Pope Urban VII, occupied the last years of his life in
translating into his native language the thoughts of the Roman emperor, in order to diffuse among
the faithful the fertilizing and vivifying seeds. He dedicated this translation to his soul, to make
it, as he says in his energetic style, redder than his purple at the sight of the virtues of this
Gentile.
I have made this translation at intervals, after having used the book for many years.
It is made from the Greek, but I have not always followed one text, and I have occasionally
compared other versions with my own. I made this translation for my own use, because I found that
it was worth the labor, but it may be useful to others also, and therefore I determined to print
it. As the original is sometimes very difficult to understand, and still more difficult to
translate, it is not possible that I have always avoided error. But I believe that I have not often
missed the meaning, and those who will take the trouble to compare the translation with the
original should not hastily conclude that I am wrong if they do not agree with me. Some passages
do give the meaning, though at first sight they may not appear to do so, and when I differ from
I think in some places they are wrong, and in other places I am sure that they are.
I have placed in some passages a plus sign, which indicates corruption in the text or great
uncertainty in the meaning. I could have made the language more easy and flowing, but I have
preferred a ruder style as being better suited to express the character of the original, and
sometimes the obscurity which may appear in the version is a fair copy of the obscurity of the
I have done the best that I could, and in the next text I have always given the same translation
of the same word. The last reflection of the stoic philosophy that I have observed
is in Simplicius's Commentary of the Incaridion of Epictetus. Simplicius was not a Christian,
and such a man was not likely to be converted at a time when Christianity was grossly corrupted.
But he was a really religious man, and he includes his commentary with a prayer to the deity,
which no Christian could improve. From the time of Zeno to Simplicius, a period of about 900 years,
the stoic philosophy formed the characters of some of the best and greatest men.
Finally it became extinct, and we hear no more of it till the revival of letters in Italy.
Angelo Poliziano met with two very inaccurate and incomplete manuscripts of Epictetus's
Incaridion, which he had translated into Latin and dedicated to his great patron Lorenzo de Medici,
in whose collection he had found the book. Poliziano's version was printed in the first
ball edition of the Incaridion, AD 1531, op. Andraeum cartondrum. Poliziano recommends the
Incaridion to Lorenzo as a work well suited to his temper, and useful in the difficulties
by which he was surrounded. Epictetus and Antoninus have had readers ever since they were printed.
The little book of Antoninus has been the companion of some great men. Machiavelli's
Art of War and Marcus Antoninus were the two books which were used when he was a young man
by Captain John Smith, and he could not have found two writers better fitted to form the
of a soldier and a man. Smith is almost unknown and forgotten in England, his native country,
but not in America where he saved the young colony of Virginia. He was great in his heroic mind and
his deeds and arms, but greater still in the nobleness of his character. For a man's greatness
lies not in wealth and station, as the vulgar believe, nor yet in his intellectual capacity,
which is often associated with the meanest moral character, the most abject servility to those in
high places, and arrogance to the poor lowly. But a man's true greatness lies in the consciousness
of an honest purpose in life, founded on a just estimate of himself and everything else,
on frequent self-examination, and a steady obedience to the rule which he knows to be right,
without troubling himself, as the emperor says he should not, about what others may think or say,
or whether they do or do not do, that which he thinks and says and does.